BOOK of the generation of Jesus Christ, son of David, son of Abraham.
(2)Abraham begot Isaac; and Isaac begot Jacob; and Jacob begot Judah
and his brothers; (3)and Judah begot Pharez and Zarah, of Tamar; and
Pharez begot Hezron; and Hezron begot Ram; (4)and Ram begot Amminadab;
and Amminadab begot Nahshon; and Nahshon begot Salmon; (5)and Salmon
begot Boaz, of Rahab; and Boaz begot Obed, of Ruth; and Obed begot
Jesse; (6)and Jesse begot David the king; and David begot Solomon, of
the wife of Uriah; (7)and Solomon begot Rehoboam; and Rehoboam begot
Abijah; and Abijah begot Asa; (8)and Asa begot Jehoshaphat; and
Jehoshaphat begot Joram; and Joram begot Uzziah; (9)and Uzziah begot
Jotham; and Jotham begot Ahaz; and Ahaz begot Hezekiah; (10)and
Hezekiah begot Manasseh; and Manasseh begot Amon; and Amon begot
Josiah; (11)and Josiah begot Jeconiah and his brothers, at the time of
the removal to Babylon. (12)And after the removal to Babylon, Jeconiah
begot Salathiel; and Salathiel begot Zerubbabel; (13)and Zerubbabel
begot Abiud; and Abiud begot Eliakim; and Eliakim begot Azor; (14)and
Azor begot Zadock; and Zadock begot Achim; and Achim begot Eliud;
(15)and Eliud begot Eleazar; and Eleazar begot Matthan; and Matthan
begot Jacob; (16)and Jacob begot Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom
was born Jesus, who is called Christ.

(17)All the generations, therefore, from Abraham unto David are
fourteen generations; and from David unto the removal to Babylon,
fourteen generations; and from the removal to Babylon unto the Christ,
fourteen generations.

(18)Now the birth of Jesus Christ was after this manner. His mother
Mary having been betrothed to Joseph, before they came together she
was found with child by the Holy Spirit. (19)And Joseph her husband,
being just, and not willing to expose her openly[1:19], desired to put
her away privately. (20)But while he thought on these things, behold,
an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying: Joseph, son
of David, fear not to take to thee Mary thy wife; for that which is
begotten in her is of the Holy Spirit. (21)And she shall bring forth a
son, and thou shalt call his name Jesus; for he shall save his people
from their sins.

(22)And all this has come to pass, that it might be fulfilled which
was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying:

    (23)Behold, the virgin shall be with child,
    And shall bring forth a son,
    And they shall call his name Immanuel;

which is interpreted[1:23], God with us.

(24)And Joseph, awaking from sleep, did as the angel of the Lord bade
him, and took to him his wife; (25)and he knew her not till she
brought forth a son[1:25]; and he called his name Jesus.



II.

AND Jesus having been born in Bethlehem of Judaea, in the days of
Herod the king, behold, there came wise men from the east to
Jerusalem, (2)saying: Where is he that is born King of the Jews? For
we saw his star in the east, and came to do him homage. (3)And the
king, Herod, hearing it, was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.
(4)And having assembled all the chief priests and scribes of the
people, he inquired of them where the Christ should be born. (5)And
they said to him: In Bethlehem of Judaea; for thus it is written by
the prophet:

    (6)And thou Bethlehem, land of Judah,
    Art by no means least among the princes of Judah;
    For out of thee shall come forth a Governor,
    Who shall rule my people Israel.

(7)Then Herod, having secretly called the wise men, inquired of them
exactly the time of the appearing of the star. (8)And he sent them to
Bethlehem, and said: Go and inquire strictly concerning the child; and
when ye have found him, bring me word again, that I also may come and
do him homage. (9)And they, having heard the king, departed; and lo,
the star, which they saw in the east, went before them, till it came
and stood over where the child was. (10)And seeing the star, they
rejoiced with exceeding great joy. (11)And coming into the house, they
saw the child with Mary his mother, and fell down, and did homage to
him; and opening their treasures, they presented to him gifts, gold
and frankincense and myrrh. (12)And being warned by God in a dream,
not to return to Herod, they departed into their own country by
another way.

(13)And when they had departed, behold, an angel of the Lord appears
to Joseph in a dream, saying: Arise, and take the child and his
mother, and flee into Egypt, and be there until I bring thee word; for
Herod is about to seek the child to destroy him. (14)And he arose and
took the child and his mother by night and departed into Egypt,
(15)and was there until the death of Herod; that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying: Out of Egypt
I called my son.

(16)Then Herod, seeing that he was mocked by the wise men, was
exceedingly enraged; and he sent forth, and slew all the male children
that were in Bethlehem, and in all its borders, from two years old and
under, according to the time which he had exactly learned from the
wise men. (17)Then was fulfilled that which was spoken through
Jeremiah the prophet, saying:

    (18)A voice was heard in Ramah,
    Weeping, and great mourning[2:18];
    Rachel weeping for her children,
    And would not be comforted, because they are not.

(19)But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord appears in a
dream to Joseph in Egypt, (20)saying: Arise, and take the child and
his mother, and go into the land of Israel; for they are dead who
sought the child's life. (21)And he arose, and took the child and his
mother, and came into the land of Israel. (22)But hearing that
Archelaus reigned in Judaea instead of Herod his father, he was afraid
to go thither; and being warned by God in a dream, he retired into the
region of Galilee. (23)And he came and dwelt in a city called
Nazareth; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the
prophets: He shall be called a Nazarene.



III.

IN those days comes John the Immerser, preaching in the wilderness of
Judaea, (2)and saying: Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
(3)For this is he that was spoken of through the prophet Isaiah,
saying:

    The voice of one crying in the wilderness,
    Prepare the way of the Lord,
    Make straight his paths.

(4)And he, John, had his raiment of camel's hair, and a leathern
girdle about his loins; and his food was locusts and wild honey.

(5)Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judaea, and all the region
about the Jordan; (6)and they were immersed by him in the Jordan,
confessing their sins. (7)But seeing many of the Pharisees and
Sadducees coming to his immersion, he said to them: Brood of vipers,
who warned you to flee from the coming wrath? (8)Bring forth therefore
fruit worthy of repentance; (9)and think not to say within yourselves,
We have Abraham for our father; for I say to you, that God is able of
these stones to raise up children to Abraham. (10)And already the axe
is laid to the root of the trees; therefore every tree that brings not
forth good fruit is cut down, and cast into the fire. (11)I indeed
immerse you in water unto repentance; but he that comes after me is
mightier than I, whose sandals I am not worthy to bear; he will
immerse you in the Holy Spirit and fire; (12)whose fan is in his hand,
and he will thoroughly cleanse his threshing-floor, and will gather
his wheat into the garner; but the chaff he will burn up with fire
unquenchable.

(13)Then Jesus comes from Galilee to the Jordan, to John, to be
immersed by him. (14)But John sought to hinder him, saying: I have
need to be immersed by thee, and dost thou come to me? (15)And Jesus
answering said to him: Suffer it now; for thus it becomes us to
fulfill all righteousness. Then he suffered him. (16)And having been
immersed, Jesus went up immediately from the water; and lo, the
heavens were opened to him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending,
as a dove, and coming upon him. (17)And lo, a voice out of heaven,
saying: This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.



IV.

THEN Jesus was led up by the Spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted
by the Devil. (2)And having fasted forty days and forty nights, he
afterwards hungered. (3)And coming to him, the tempter said: If thou
art the Son of God, command that these stones become loaves of bread.
(4)But he answering said: It is written, Man shall not live on bread
alone, but on every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

(5)Then the Devil takes him into the holy city, and sets him on the
pinnacle of the temple, (6)and says to him: If thou art the Son of
God, cast thyself down; for it is written:

    He will give his angels command concerning thee;
    And on their hands they will bear thee up,
    Lest haply thou dash thy foot against a stone.

(7)Jesus said to him: Again it is written, Thou shalt not tempt the
Lord thy God.

(8)Again the Devil takes him into an exceedingly high mountain, and
shows him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them; (9)and
says to him: All these things I will give thee, if thou wilt fall down
and worship me. (10)Then Jesus says to him: Get thee hence, Satan; for
it is written: Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt
thou serve. (11)Then the Devil leaves him; and behold, angels came and
ministered to him.

(12)And hearing that John was delivered up, he retired into Galilee.
(13)And leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt in Capernaum, which is by
the sea, in the borders of Zebulun and Naphtali; (14)that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying:

    (15)The land of Zebulun, and the land of Naphtali,
    By the way of the sea, beyond the Jordan,
    Galilee of the Gentiles,
    (16)The people that sat in darkness, saw great light,
    And to those sitting in the region and shadow of death light
sprang up.

(17)From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say: Repent, for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand. (18)And walking by the sea of Galilee,
he saw two brothers, Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother,
casting a net into the sea; for they were fishermen. (19)And he says
to them: Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men. (20)And
they, immediately leaving the nets, followed him. (21)And going on
from thence, he saw other two brothers, James the son of Zebedee, and
John his brother, in the ship with Zebedee their father, mending their
nets; and he called them. (22)And they, immediately leaving the ship
and their father, followed him.

(23)And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues,
and preaching the good news of the kingdom, and healing every sickness
and every infirmity among the people. (24)And his fame went forth into
all Syria; and they brought to him all that were sick, taken with
divers diseases and torments, and possessed with demons, and lunatic,
and palsied; and he healed them. (25)And great multitudes followed him
from Galilee, and Decapolis, and Jerusalem, and Judaea, and from
beyond the Jordan.



V.

AND seeing the multitudes, he went up into the mountain; and he having
sat down, his disciples came to him. (2)And he opened his mouth, and
taught them, saying:

(3)Happy the poor in spirit; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

(4)Happy they that mourn; for they shall be comforted.

(5)Happy the meek; for they shall inherit the earth[5:5].

(6)Happy they that hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they
shall be filled.

(7)Happy the merciful; for they shall obtain mercy.

(8)Happy the pure in heart; for they shall see God.

(9)Happy the peacemakers; for they shall be called sons of God.

(10)Happy they who are persecuted for righteousness' sake; for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven.

(11)Happy are ye, when they shall revile and persecute you, and shall
say all evil against you falsely[5:11], for my sake. (12)Rejoice, and
exult; because great is your reward in heaven, for so they persecuted
the prophets that were before you.

(13)Ye are the salt of the earth; but if the salt become tasteless,
wherewith shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing, but
to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot by men.

(14)Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on a hill can
not be hid. (15)Nor do they light a lamp and put it under the bushel,
but on the lamp-stand; and it shines to all that are in the house.
(16)Thus let your light shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father who is in heaven.

(17)Think not that I came to destroy the law, or the prophets; I came
not to destroy, but to fulfill. (18)For verily I say to you, till
heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall not pass from the
law, till all be fulfilled. (19)Whoever therefore shall break one of
these least commandments, and shall teach men so, shall be called the
least in the kingdom of heaven; but whoever shall do and teach them,
he shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.

(20)For I say to you, that except your righteousness shall exceed that
of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

(21)Ye heard that it was said to those[5:21] of old: Thou shalt not
kill; and whoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment.
(22)But I say to you, that every one who is angry with his brother,
without cause[5:22a], shall be in danger of the judgment; and whoever
shall say to his brother, Raca[5:22b]! shall be in danger of the
council; and whoever shall say, Thou fool! shall be in danger of
hell-fire. (23)Therefore if thou bringest thy gift to the altar, and
there rememberest that thy brother has aught against thee; (24)leave
there thy gift before the altar, and go, first be reconciled to thy
brother and then come and offer thy gift.

(25)Agree with thine adversary quickly, while thou art in the way with
him; lest haply the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge
deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison. (26)Verily
I say to thee, thou shalt not come out thence, till thou hast paid the
uttermost farthing.

(27)Ye heard that it was said: Thou shalt not commit adultery. (28)But
I say to you, that every one who looks on a woman, to lust after her,
has already committed adultery with her in his heart. (29)And if thy
right eye causes thee to offend, pluck it out and cast it from thee;
for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members perish, and not
thy whole body be cast into hell. (30)And if thy right hand causes
thee to offend, cut it off and cast it from thee; for it is profitable
for thee that one of thy members perish, and not thy whole body be
cast into hell.

(31)And it was said: Whoever shall put away his wife, let him give her
a writing of divorcement. (32)But I say to you, that whoever shall put
away his wife, save for the cause of fornication, makes her commit
adultery; and whoever shall marry her when put away, commits adultery.

(33)Again ye heard, that it was said to those of old[5:33]: Thou shalt
not swear falsely, but shalt perform to the Lord thine oaths. (34)But
I say to you, swear not at all; neither by heaven, for it is God's
throne; (35)nor by the earth, for it is his footstool; nor by
Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King. (36)Nor shalt thou
swear by thy head; because thou canst not make one hair white or
black. (37)But let your word be, Yea, yea, Nay, nay; for that which is
more than these comes of evil.

(38)Ye heard that it was said: An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth. (39)But I say to you, that ye resist not evil; but whoever
shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also.
(40)And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take thy coat, let
him have thy cloak also. (41)And whoever shall compel thee to go one
mile, go with him two. (42)Give to him that asks of thee, and from him
that would borrow of thee turn not away.

(43)Ye heard that it was said: Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and shalt
hate thine enemy. (44)But I say to you, love your enemies, and pray
for those who persecute you; (45)that ye may be sons of your Father
who is in heaven; for he causes his sun to rise on the evil and the
good, and sends rain on the just and the unjust. (46)For if ye love
those who love you, what reward have ye? Do not also the publicans the
same? (47)And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye that excels?
Do not also the heathen thus? (48)Be ye therefore perfect, even as
your Father who is in heaven is perfect.



VI.

TAKE heed that ye do not your righteousness before men, to be seen by
them; otherwise ye have no reward with your Father who is in heaven.
(2)Therefore when thou doest alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee,
as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they
may have glory of men. Verily I say to you, they have in full their
reward. (3)But when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what
thy right hand does; (4)that thine aims may be in secret and thy
Father who sees in secret will himself reward thee.

(5)And when ye pray, ye shall not be as the hypocrites; for they love
to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets,
that they may be seen by men. Verily I say to you, they have in full
their reward. (6)But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet,
and having shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is in secret; and thy
Father who sees in secret will reward thee.

(7)But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do; for
they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking. (8)Be not
ye therefore like to them; for your Father knows what things ye have
need of, before ye ask him. (9)Do ye, therefore, pray after this
manner:

Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name.

(10)Thy kingdom come; thy will be done, as in heaven, so also on the
earth.

(11)Give us this day our daily bread[6:11].

(12)And forgive us our debts, as also we forgave our debtors.

(13)And bring us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil[6:13].

(14)For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will
also forgive you; (15)but if ye forgive not men their trespasses,
neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.

(16)And when ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance;
for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear to men to fast.
Verily I say to you, they have in full their reward. (17)But thou,
when thou fastest, anoint thy head, and wash thy face; (18)that thou
appear not to men to fast, but to thy Father who is in secret; and thy
Father who sees in secret will reward thee.

(19)Lay not up for yourselves treasures on the earth, where moth and
rust consume, and where thieves break through and steal. (20)But lay
up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust
consumes, and where thieves do not break through nor steal. (21)For
where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

(22)The lamp of the body is the eye. If therefore thine eye be single,
thy whole body will be light; (23)but if thine eye be evil, thy whole
body will be dark. If therefore the light that is in thee is darkness,
how great the darkness! (24)No man can serve two masters; for either
he will hate the one, and love the other, or he will hold to one and
despise the other. Ye can not serve God and Mammon.

(25)For this cause I say to you, take not thought for your life, what
ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor for your body, what ye shall
put on. Is not the life more than food, and the body than raiment?
(26)Behold the birds of the air, that they sow not, nor reap, nor
gather into barns; and your heavenly Father feeds them. Are ye not
much better than they? (27)And which of you by taking thought can add
one cubit to his stature[6:27]? (28)And why take ye thought for
raiment? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow. They toil
not, nor spin; (29)and I say to you, that even Solomon in all his
glory was not arrayed like one of these. (30)And if God so clothes the
grass of the field, which to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the
oven, will he not much more you, ye of little faith? (31)Take not
thought therefore, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink?
or, Wherewith shall we be clothed? (32)For after all these do the
Gentiles seek. For your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all
these. (33)But seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness;
and all these shall be added to you. (34)Take not thought, therefore,
for the morrow; for the morrow will take thought for itself.
Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.



VII.

JUDGE not, that ye be not judged. (2)For with what judgment ye judge,
ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be
measured to you. (3)And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy
brother's eye, but perceivest not the beam that is in thine own eye?
(4)Or how wilt thou say to thy brother: Let me cast out the mote from
thine eye; and behold, the beam is in thine own eye? (5)Hypocrite!
first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then thou wilt see
clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye.

(6)Give not that which is holy to the dogs, nor cast your pearls
before the swine; lest they trample them with their feet, and turn and
rend you.

(7)Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and
it shall be opened to you. (8)For every one that asks receives; and he
that seeks finds; and to him that knocks it shall be opened. (9)Or
what man is there of you, of whom if his son ask bread, will he give
him a stone? (10)And if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?
(11)If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your
children, how much more will your Father who is in heaven give good
things to those who ask him? (12)Therefore all things whatever ye
would that men should do to you, so also do ye to them; for this is
the law and the prophets.

(13)Enter in through the strait gate; because wide is the gate, and
broad the way, that leads to destruction, and many are they who go in
thereat. (14)[7:14]Because strait is the gate, and narrow the way,
that leads to life, and few are they who find it.

(15)Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheeps' clothing, but
inwardly are ravening wolves.

(16)Ye shall know them from their fruits. Do men gather grapes from
thorns, or figs from thistles? (17)So every good tree brings forth
good fruit; but the corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit. (18)A good
tree can not bring forth evil fruit, nor a corrupt tree bring forth
good fruit. (19)Every tree that brings not forth good fruit is cut
down, and cast into the fire. (20)So then, from their fruits ye shall
know them.

(21)Not every one that says to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven; but he that does the will of my Father who is in
heaven. (22)Many will say to me in that day: Lord, Lord, did we not
prophesy in thy name, and in thy name cast out demons, and in thy name
do many miracles? (23)And then will I profess to them, I never knew
you; depart from me, ye who work iniquity.

(24)Every one, therefore, who hears these sayings of mine[7:24], and
does them, I will liken him to a wise man, who built his house on the
rock. (25)And the rain descended, and the streams came, and the winds
blew, and fell upon that house; and it did not fall, for it had been
founded on the rock. (26)And every one who hears these sayings of
mine, and does them not, shall be likened to a foolish man, who built
his house on the sand. (27)And the rain descended, and the streams
came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell; and
great was the fall of it.

(28)And it came to pass, when Jesus ended these sayings, that the
multitudes were astonished at his teaching. (29)For he taught them as
having authority, and not as the scribes.



VIII.

WHEN he had come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed
him. (2)And, behold, there came a leper and bowed down to him, saying:
Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst cleanse me. (3)And stretching forth his
hand, he touched him, saying: I will; be thou cleansed. And
immediately his leprosy was cleansed. (4)And Jesus says to him: See
thou tell no one; but go, show thyself to the priest, and offer the
gift that Moses commanded, for a testimony to them.

(5)And as he entered into Capernaum, there came to him a centurion,
beseeching him, (6)and saying: Lord, my servant lies at home palsied,
grievously tormented. (7)And Jesus says to him: I will come and heal
him. (8)The centurion answered and said: Lord, I am not worthy that
thou shouldst come under my roof; but only say in a word, and my
servant will be healed. (9)For I am a man under authority, having
soldiers under me, and I say to this one, Go, and he goes; and to
another, Come, and he comes; and to my servant, Do this, and he does
it. (10)And Jesus hearing it marveled, and said to those who followed:
Verily I say to you, I found not so great faith, even in Israel.
(11)And I say to you, that many will come from the east and west, and
will recline at table, with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the
kingdom of heaven; (12)but the sons of the kingdom will be cast out
into the outer darkness. There will be the weeping, and the gnashing
of teeth! (13)And Jesus said to the centurion: Go thy way; and as thou
didst believe, be it done to thee. And his servant was healed in that
hour.

(14)And Jesus, coming into the house of Peter, saw his mother-in-law
lying, and sick with fever. (15)And he touched her hand, and the fever
left her; and she arose, and ministered to him. (16)When evening was
come, they brought to him many that were possessed with demons; and he
cast out the spirits with a word, and healed all that were sick;
(17)that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the
prophet, saying: Himself took our infirmities, and bore our
sicknesses.

(18)And Jesus, seeing great multitudes about him, commanded to depart
to the other side. (19)And a certain scribe came, and said to him:
Teacher, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest. (20)And Jesus
says to him: The foxes have holes and the birds of the air nests; but
the Son of man has not where he may lay his head. (21)And another of
his disciples said to him: Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my
father. (22)But Jesus said to him: Follow me, and let the dead bury
their own dead.

(23)And when he had entered into the ship, his disciples followed him.
(24)And, behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, so that the
ship was covered by the waves; but he was sleeping. (25)And the
disciples came and awoke him, saying: Lord, save us; we perish.
(26)And he says to them: Why are ye fearful, ye of little faith? Then
rising, he rebuked the winds and the sea; and there was a great calm.
(27)And the men marveled, saying: What manner of man is this, that
even the winds and the sea obey him!

(28)And when he had come to the other side, into the country of the
Gadarenes[8:28], there met him two possessed with demons, coming out
of the tombs, exceedingly fierce, so that no one was able to pass by
that way. (29)And, behold, they cried out, saying: What have we to do
with thee, Son of God? Camest thou hither to torment us before the
time? (30)And there was afar off from them a herd of many swine
feeding. And the demons besought him, saying: (31)If thou cast us out,
send us away into the herd of swine. (32)And he said to them, Go. And
they, coming out, went away into the swine; and, behold, the whole
herd rushed down the steep into the sea, and perished in the waters.
(33)And the herdsmen fled, and went away into the city, and told every
thing, and what had befallen the possessed with demons. (34)And,
behold, all the city came out to meet Jesus; and seeing him, they
besought that he would depart from their borders.



IX.

AND entering into the ship he passed over, and came to his own city.
(2)And, behold, they brought to him one that was palsied, lying on a
bed. And Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the palsied man: Child, be
of good cheer; thy sins are forgiven. (3)And, behold, certain of the
scribes said within themselves: This man blasphemes. (4)And Jesus
knowing their thoughts said: Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts?
(5)For which is easier, to say: Thy sins are forgiven; or to say:
Arise, and walk? (6)But that ye may know that the Son of man has power
on earth to forgive sins, (then says he to the palsied man) Arise,
take up thy bed, and go to thy house. (7)And rising up he departed to
his house. (8)And seeing it the multitudes feared, and glorified God,
who gave such power to men.

(9)And Jesus, passing on from thence, saw a man named Matthew, sitting
at the place of receiving custom; and he says to him: Follow me. And
he rose up and followed him. (10)And it came to pass that, as he
reclined at table in the house, behold, many publicans and sinners
came and reclined at table with Jesus and his disciples. (11)And the
Pharisees, seeing it, said to his disciples: Why does your teacher eat
with the publicans and the sinners? (12)And Jesus hearing it, said:
They who are well need not a physician, but they who are sick. (13)But
go, and learn what this means: I desire mercy and not sacrifice; for I
came not to call righteous men, but sinners.

(14)Then come to him the disciples of John, saying: Why do we and the
Pharisees fast often, but thy disciples fast not? (15)And Jesus said
to them: Can the sons of the bridechamber mourn[9:15], so long as the
bridegroom is with them? But days will come when the bridegroom will
be taken from them, and then they will fast. (16)And no one puts a
piece of unfulled cloth on an old garment; for that which fills it up
takes from the garment, and a worse rent is made. (17)Nor do they put
new wine into old skins; else the skins burst, and the wine runs out,
and the skins are destroyed. But they put new wine into new skins, and
both are preserved together.

(18)While he was speaking these things to them, behold, there came a
ruler, and bowed down to him, saying: My daughter just now died; but
come and lay thy hand upon her, and she will live. (19)And Jesus arose
and was following him, he and his disciples. (20)And behold, a woman,
having a flow of blood twelve years, came behind, and touched the
fringe of his garment. (21)For she said within herself: If I only
touch his garment, I shall be made whole. (22)And Jesus, turning and
seeing her, said: Daughter, be of good cheer; thy faith has made thee
whole. (23)And the woman was made whole from that hour. And Jesus,
coming into the house of the ruler, and seeing the minstrels and the
crowd making a noise, (24)said: Give place; for the maiden is not
dead, but is sleeping. And they laughed him to scorn. (25)But when the
crowd was put forth, he went in, and took hold of her hand, and the
maiden arose. (26)And this report went abroad into all that land.

(27)And as Jesus passed on from thence, two blind men followed him,
crying, and saying: Have mercy on us, Son of David. (28)And when he
had come into the house, the blind men came to him. And Jesus says to
them: Believe ye that I am able to do this? They say to him: Yea,
Lord. (29)Then he touched their eyes, saying: According to your faith
be it done to you. (30)And their eyes were opened. And Jesus sternly
charged them, saying: Take heed, let no one know it. (31)But they,
going out, spread abroad his fame in all that country.

(32)And as they were going out, behold, they brought to him a man
dumb, possessed with a demon. (33)And the demon being cast out, the
dumb spoke. And the multitudes marveled, saying: It was never so seen
in Israel. (34)But the Pharisees said: He casts out the demons through
the prince of the demons.

(35)And Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in
their synagogues, and preaching the good news of the kingdom, and
healing every sickness and every infirmity. (36)And seeing the
multitudes, he was moved with compassion for them, because they were
harassed, and scattered[9:36], as sheep having no shepherd. (37)Then
he says to his disciples: The harvest indeed is great, but the
laborers are few. (38)Pray therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he
will send forth laborers into his harvest.



X.

AND calling to him his twelve disciples, he gave them authority over
unclean spirits, so as to cast them out, and to heal every sickness
and every infirmity.

(2)And the names of the twelve apostles are these; first Simon, who is
called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James the son of Zebedee, and
John his brother; (3)Philip, and Bartholomew; Thomas, and Matthew the
publican; James the son of Alpheus, and Lebbeus surnamed Thaddeus;
(4)Simon the Cananite[10:4], and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed
him.

(5)These twelve Jesus sent forth, and charged them, saying: Go not
into the way to the Gentiles, and into a city of Samaritans enter not.
(6)But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. (7)And as
ye go, preach, saying: The kingdom of heaven is at hand. (8)Heal the
sick, raise the dead[10:8], cleanse lepers, cast out demons. Freely ye
received, freely give. (9)Provide not gold, nor silver, nor brass in
your girdles; (10)nor bag for the journey, nor two coats, nor sandals,
nor staff; for the laborer is worthy of his living. (11)And into
whatever city or village ye shall enter, inquire who in it is worthy;
and there abide till ye go thence. (12)But when ye come into the
house, salute it. (13)And if the house be worthy, let your peace come
upon it; but if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you.
(14)And whoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye go
out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet. (15)Verily
I say to you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and
Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city.

(16)Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves; be
therefore wise as serpents, and simple as doves. (17)But beware of
men; for they will deliver you up to councils, and will scourge you in
their synagogues; (18)and before governors also and kings will ye be
brought for my sake, for a testimony to them and to the Gentiles.

(19)But when they deliver you up, take not thought how or what ye
shall speak; for it shall be given you in that hour what ye shall
speak. (20)For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father
that speaks in you.

(21)And the brother will deliver up the brother to death, and the
father the child; and children will rise up against parents, and cause
them to be put to death. (22)And ye will be hated by all, for my
name's sake; but he that has endured to the end, the same shall be
saved.

(23)But when they persecute you in this city, flee into the other; for
verily I say to you, ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel,
till the Son of man come.

(24)A disciple is not above the teacher, nor a servant above his lord.
(25)It is enough for the disciple that he be as his teacher, and the
servant as his lord: If they called the master of the house Beelzebul,
how much more those of his household!

(26)Fear them not therefore; for there is nothing covered that shall
not be revealed, and hid that shall not be known. (27)What I say to
you in the darkness, that speak ye in the light; and what ye hear in
the ear, that proclaim upon the house-tops. (28)And be not afraid of
those who kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather
fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.

(29)Are not two sparrows sold for a penny? And one of them shall not
fall on the ground without your Father. (30)But the very hairs of your
head are all numbered. (31)Fear not therefore; ye are of more value
than many sparrows.

(32)Every one, therefore, who shall acknowledge me before men, him
will I also acknowledge before my Father who is in heaven. (33)But
whoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my
Father who is in heaven.

(34)Think not that I came to send peace on the earth; I came not to
send peace, but a sword. (35)For I came to set a man at variance with
his father, and a daughter with her mother, and a bride with her
mother-in-law; (36)and a man's foes will be they of his household.

(37)He that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me;
and he that loves son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me.
(38)And he that does not take his cross and follow after me, is not
worthy of me. (39)He that finds his life shall lose it; and he that
loses his life for my sake shall find it.

(40)He that receives you receives me; and he that receives me receives
him who sent me. (41)He that receives a prophet in the name of a
prophet shall receive a prophet's reward; and he that receives a
righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous
man's reward. (42)And whoever shall give to drink a cup of cold water
only to one of these little ones, in the name of a disciple, verily I
say to you, he shall not lose his reward.



XI.

AND it came to pass, when Jesus made an end of commanding his twelve
disciples, that he departed thence to teach and to preach in their
cities.

(2)And John, having heard in the prison the works of the Christ, sent
by his disciples, (3)and said to him: Art thou he that comes, or look
we for another?

(4)And Jesus answering said to them: Go and report to John what ye
hear and see. (5)The blind receive sight and the lame walk, lepers are
cleansed and the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and to the poor good
tidings are published. (6)And happy is he, whoever shall not be
offended at me.

(7)And as these were departing, Jesus began to say to the multitudes
concerning John: What went ye out into the wilderness to behold? A
reed shaken by the wind?

(8)But what went ye out to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold,
they who wear soft clothing are in king's houses.

(9)But what went ye out to see? A prophet[11:9]? Yea, I say to you,
and more than a prophet. (10)For this is he of whom it is written:

    Behold, I send forth my messenger before thy face,
    Who shall prepare thy way before thee.

(11)Verily I say to you, among those born of women, there has not
risen a greater than John the Immerser. But he who is least in the
kingdom of heaven is greater than he.

(12)And from the days of John the Immerser until now, the kingdom of
heaven suffers violence, and the violent seize upon it. (13)For all
the prophets and the law prophesied until John. (14)And if ye are
willing to receive it, he is the Elijah that should come. (15)He that
has ears to hear, let him hear.

(16)But to what shall I liken this generation? It is like to children
sitting in the markets, who call to their fellows, (17)and say: We
piped to you, and ye danced not; we sang the lament, and ye did not
beat the breast. (18)For John came neither eating nor drinking, and
they say: He has a demon. (19)The Son of man came eating and drinking,
and they say: Behold a glutton and a wine-drinker, a friend of
publicans and sinners. But wisdom was justified on the part of her
children.

(20)Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his miracles
were done, because they repented not. (21)Woe to thee, Chorazin! Woe
to thee, Bethsaida! For if the miracles, that were done in you, had
been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in
sackcloth and ashes. (22)But I say to you, it will be more tolerable
for Tyre and Sidon in the day of judgment, than for you.

(23)And thou, Capernaum, [11:23a]that wast exalted to heaven, shalt go
down to the underworld[11:23b]. For if the miracles, that were done in
thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day.
(24)But I say to you, that it will be more tolerable for the land of
Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee.

(25)At that time Jesus answered and said: I thank thee, O Father, Lord
of heaven and earth, that thou didst hide these things from the wise
and discerning, and reveal them to babes; (26)yea, O Father, that so
it seemed good in thy sight! (27)All things were delivered to me by my
Father; and no one knows the Son but the Father; nor does any one know
the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son is pleased to reveal
him.

(28)Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy-laden, and I will
give you rest. (29)Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me; for I am
meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest for your souls.
(30)For my yoke is easy, and my burden light.



XII.

AT that time Jesus went on the sabbath through the grain-fields; and
his disciples were hungry, and began to pluck ears of grain, and to
eat. (2)And the Pharisees seeing it said to him: Behold, thy disciples
are doing that which it is not lawful to do on the sabbath. (3)And he
said to them: Have ye not read what David did, when he hungered,
himself and those with him; (4)how he entered into the house of God,
and ate the show-bread, which it was not lawful for him to eat, nor
for those with him, but for the priests alone? (5)Or have ye not read
in the law, that on the sabbath the priests in the temple profane the
sabbath, and are blameless? (6)But I say to you, that a greater than
the temple is here. (7)But if ye had known what this means, I desire
mercy and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the blameless.
(8)For the Son of man is Lord of the sabbath.

(9)And departing from thence, he went into their synagogue. (10)And
behold, there was a man, having his hand withered. And they asked him,
saying: Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath? that they might accuse
him. (11)And he said to them: What man will there be of you, that
shall have one sheep, and if this fall into a pit on the sabbath, will
not lay hold of it, and raise it up? (12)How much better then is a man
than a sheep! So that it is lawful to do well on the sabbath. (13)Then
he says to the man: Stretch forth thy hand. And he stretched it forth;
and it was restored whole, as the other.

(14)And the Pharisees went out, and took counsel against him, how they
might destroy him. (15)But Jesus, knowing it, withdrew from thence;
and great multitudes followed him, and he healed them all. (16)And he
charged them that they should not make him known; (17)that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying:

    (18)Behold my servant, whom I chose,
    My beloved, in whom my soul is well pleased.
    I will put my spirit upon him,
    And he will declare judgment to the Gentiles.
    (19)He will not strive, nor cry;
    Nor will any one hear his voice in the streets.
    (20)A bruised reed he will not break,
    And smoking flax he will not quench,
    Till he send forth judgment unto victory.
    (21)And in his name will Gentiles hope.

(22)Then was brought to him one possessed with a demon, blind, and
dumb; and he healed him, so that the blind and dumb both[12:22] spoke
and saw. (23)And all the multitudes were amazed, and said: Is this the
Son of David? (24)But the Pharisees hearing it said: This man does not
cast out the demons, except through Beelzebul, prince of the demons.
(25)And Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said to them: Every kingdom
divided against itself is brought to desolation; and any city or house
divided against itself shall not stand. (26)And if Satan cast out
Satan, he is divided against himself; how then shall his kingdom
stand? (27)And if I through Beelzebul cast out the demons, through
whom do your sons cast them out? Therefore they shall be your judges.
(28)But if I through the Spirit of God cast out the demons, then is
the kingdom of God come near to you. (29)Or how can any one enter into
a strong man's house, and seize upon his goods, except he first bind
the strong man? And then he will plunder his house.

(30)He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathers not with
me scatters abroad.

(31)Therefore I say to you, every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven
to men; but the blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven.
(32)And whoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it will be
forgiven him; but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit, it will not
be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in that which is to come.

(33)Either make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree
corrupt and its fruit corrupt; for from the fruit the tree is known.

(34)Brood of vipers! How can ye, being evil, speak good things? For
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. (35)The good man
out of the good treasure sends forth good things; and the evil man out
of the evil treasure sends forth evil things. (36)But I say to you,
that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account
thereof in the day of judgment. (37)For from thy words thou shalt be
justified, and from thy words thou shalt be condemned.

(38)Then certain of the scribes and of the Pharisees answered him
saying: Teacher, we desire to see a sign from thee. (39)But he
answering said to them: An evil and adulterous generation seeks after
a sign; and no sign shall be given to it, but the sign of Jonah the
prophet. (40)For as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly
of the fish, so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in
the heart of the earth. (41)Men of Nineveh will rise in the judgment
with this generation, and will condemn it; because they repented at
the preaching of Jonah, and behold, a greater than Jonah is here.
(42)A queen of the south will rise up in the judgment with this
generation, and will condemn it; for she came from the utmost parts of
the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, a greater than
Solomon is here.

(43)But when the unclean spirit is gone out from the man, he goes
through dry places seeking rest, and finds it not. (44)Then he says, I
will return into my house from whence I came out and coming he finds
it empty, swept, and set in order. (45)Then he goes, and takes with
him seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in
and dwell there; and the last state of that man becomes worse than the
first. So shall it be also with this wicked generation.

(46)While he was yet speaking to the multitudes, behold, his mother
and his brothers were standing without, seeking to speak to him.
(47)And one said to him: Behold, thy mother and thy brothers are
standing without, seeking to speak to thee. (48)But he answering said
to him that told him: Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?
(49)And stretching forth his hand toward his disciples, he said:
Behold my mother and my brothers! (50)For whoever shall do the will of
my Father who is in heaven, he is my brother, and sister, and mother.



XIII.

AND on that day Jesus went out of the house, and sat by the sea-side.
(2)And great multitudes were gathered together to him, so that he went
into the ship and sat down; and all the multitude stood on the beach.
(3)And he spoke many things to them in parables, saying:

(4)Behold, the sower went forth to sow. And as he sowed, some fell by
the way-side, and the birds came and devoured them. (5)And others fell
on the rocky places, where they had not much earth; and forthwith they
sprang up, because they had not depth of earth. (6)And when the sun
was up, they were scorched; and because they had not root, they
withered away. (7)And others fell upon the thorns; and the thorns came
up, and choked them. (8)And others fell on the good ground, and
yielded fruit, some a hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty. (9)He that
has ears to hear, let him hear[13:9].

(10)And the disciples came and said to him: Why dost thou speak to
them in parables? (11)And he answering said to them: To you it is
given[13:11] to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven; but to
them it is not given. (12)For whoever has, to him shall be given, and
he shall have abundance; but whoever has not, even what he has shall
be taken from him. (13)Therefore I speak to them in parables; because
seeing they see not, and hearing they hear not, nor understand.
(14)And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah, which says:

    With the hearing ye will hear, and will not understand;
    And seeing ye will see, and will not perceive.
    (15)For the heart of this people is become gross,
    And their ears are dull of hearing,
    And their eyes they have closed;
    Lest haply they see with their eyes,
    And hear with their ears,
    And understand with their heart,
    And turn, and I shall heal them.

(16)But happy are your eyes, because they see; and your ears, because
they hear. (17)For verily I say to you, that many prophets and
righteous men desired to see what ye are beholding, and did not see,
and to hear what ye are hearing, and did not hear.

(18)Hear therefore the parable of the sower. (19)When any one hears
the word of the kingdom, and understands not, then comes the evil one
and snatches away what was sown in his heart. This is that which was
sown by the way-side.

(20)And that sown on the rocky places, this is he that hears the word,
and immediately with joy receives it; (21)and has not root in himself,
but is only for a time; and when tribulation or persecution arises
because of the word, immediately he is offended.

(22)And that sown among the thorns, this is he that hears the word,
and the care of this world and the deceitfulness of riches choke the
word, and it becomes unfruitful. (23)And that sown on the good ground,
this is he that hears the word and understands; who bears fruit, and
produces, some a hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty.

(24)Another parable he put forth to them, saying: The kingdom of
heaven is likened to a man that sowed good seed in his field. (25)But
while men slept, his enemy came and sowed darnel among the wheat, and
went away. (26)And when the blade sprang up and produced fruit, then
appeared the darnel also. (27)And the servants of the householder came
and said to him: Sir, didst thou not sow good seed in thy field? From
whence then has it darnel? (28)He said to them: An enemy did this. The
servants said to him: Wilt thou then that we go and gather them up?
(29)He said: Nay, lest while ye gather up the darnel, ye root up the
wheat with them. (30)Let both grow together until the harvest. And in
time of harvest I will say to the reapers: Gather up first the darnel,
and bind them in bundles to burn them; but gather the wheat into my
barn.

(31)Another parable he put forth to them, saying: The kingdom of
heaven is like to a grain of mustard, which a man took and sowed in
his field. (32)Which is the least indeed of all seeds; but when it is
grown, it is greater than the herbs, and becomes a tree, so that the
birds of the air come and lodge in its branches.

(33)Another parable he spoke to them: The kingdom of heaven is like to
leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till the
whole was leavened.

(34)All these things Jesus spoke to the multitudes in parables; and
without a parable he spoke nothing to them; (35)that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet, saying:

    I will open my mouth in parables;
    I will utter things hidden from the foundation of the world.

(36)Then having sent away the multitudes[13:36], he went into the
house. And his disciples came to him, saying: Explain to us the
parable of the darnel of the field. (37)And answering he said to them:

He that sows the good seed is the Son of man. (38)The field is the
world. The good seed, these are the sons of the kingdom; but the
darnel are the sons of the evil one, (39)and the enemy that sowed them
is the Devil. The harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are
angels. (40)As therefore the darnel are gathered up and are burned
with fire, so shall it be in the end of the world. (41)The Son of man
will send forth his angels, and they will gather out of his kingdom
all the causes of offense, and those who do iniquity, (42)and will
cast them into the furnace of fire; there will be the wailing, and the
gnashing of teeth! (43)Then will the righteous shine forth as the sun
in the kingdom of their Father. He that has ears to hear, let him
hear[13:43].

(44)Again, the kingdom of heaven is like to a treasure hidden in the
field, which a man found and concealed; and for joy thereof[13:44], he
goes and sells all that he has, and buys that field.

(45)Again, the kingdom of heaven is like to a merchant seeking goodly
pearls; (46)and having found one pearl of great price, he went and
sold all that he had, and bought it.

(47)Again, the kingdom of heaven is like to a net, cast into the sea,
and gathering together of every kind. (48)Which, when it was filled,
they drew up upon the beach, and sat down and gathered the good into
vessels, but cast the bad away. (49)So will it be in the end of the
world. The angels will go forth, and will separate the wicked from
among the just, (50)and will cast them into the furnace of fire; there
will be the wailing, and the gnashing of teeth!

(51)Did ye understand all these things? They say to him, Yea, Lord.
(52)And he said to them: Therefore every scribe, instructed in the
kingdom of heaven, is like to a householder, who brings forth out of
his treasure new and old.

(53)And it came to pass, when Jesus finished these parables, that he
departed thence. (54)And coming into his own country, he taught them
in their synagogue; so that they were astonished, and said: Whence has
this man this wisdom, and the miracles? Is not this the carpenter's
son? (55)Is not his mother called Mary, and his brothers, James, and
Joseph[13:55], and Simon, and Judas? (56)And his sisters, are they not
all with us? Whence then has this man all these things? (57)And they
were offended at him. But Jesus said to them: A prophet is not without
honor, save in his own country, and in his own house.

(58)And he did not many miracles there, because of their unbelief.



XIV.

AT that time Herod the tetrarch heard the fame of Jesus. (2)And he
said to his servants: This is John the Immerser; he is risen from the
dead, and therefore do these powers[14:2] work in him.

(3)For Herod laid hold of John, and bound him and put him in prison,
for the sake of Herodias, the wife of Philip, his brother. (4)For John
said to him: It is not lawful for thee to have her. (5)And though
desiring to put him to death, he feared the multitude, because they
held him as a prophet. (6)But when Herod's birthday was kept, the
daughter of Herodias danced before them, and pleased Herod.
(7)Whereupon he promised with an oath, to give her whatever she should
ask. (8)And she, being urged on by her mother, says: Give me here, on
a platter, the head of John the Immerser. (9)And the king was sorry;
but for the sake of the oath, and of those who reclined at table with
him, he commanded it to be given. (10)And he sent, and beheaded John
in the prison. (11)And his head was brought on a platter, and was
given to the damsel, and she brought it to her mother. (12)And his
disciples came and took up the body, and buried it; and they went and
reported it to Jesus.

(13)And when Jesus heard it, he withdrew from thence by ship, into a
desert place apart. And the multitudes hearing of it, followed him on
foot from the cities. (14)And going forth he saw a great multitude,
and had compassion on them, and he healed their sick.

(15)And when it was evening, his disciples came to him, saying: The
place is desert, and the time is already passed away; dismiss the
multitudes, that they may go away into the villages, and buy
themselves victuals. (16)But Jesus said to them: They need not go
away; give ye them to eat. (17)And they say to him: We have here but
five loaves, and two fishes. (18)He said: Bring them hither to me.
(19)And he commanded that the multitudes should lie down on the grass,
and took the five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up to heaven
he blessed, and broke, and gave the loaves to the disciples, and the
disciples to the multitudes. (20)And they all ate, and were filled;
and they took up of the fragments that remained twelve baskets full.
(21)And they who ate were about five thousand men, besides women and
children.

(22)And straightway he constrained his disciples to enter into the
ship, and to go before him to the other side, while he dismissed the
multitudes.

(23)And having dismissed the multitudes, he went up into the mountain
apart to pray; and when evening was come, he was there alone. (24)But
the ship was already in the midst of the sea, vexed by the waves; for
the wind was contrary. (25)And in the fourth watch of the night he
went to them, walking on the sea. (26)And the disciples, seeing him
walking on the sea, were troubled, saying: It is a spectre. And they
cried out for fear. (27)But straightway Jesus spoke to them, saying:
Be of good cheer; it is I, be not afraid. (28)And Peter answering him
said: Lord, if it is thou, bid me come to thee on the water. (29)And
he said: Come. And coming down from the ship, Peter walked on the
water, to go to Jesus. (30)But seeing the wind boisterous, he was
afraid; and beginning to sink, he cried out, saying: Lord, save me.
(31)And immediately Jesus, stretching forth his hand, took hold of
him, and said to him: Thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou
doubt?

(32)And when they had entered into the ship, the wind ceased. (33)And
those in the ship came and worshiped him[14:33], saying: Of a truth,
thou art the Son of God.

(34)And passing over, they came into the land of Gennesaret. (35)And
the men of that place, knowing him, sent out into all that country
round, and brought to him all that were diseased (36)and besought him
that they might only touch the fringe of his garment; and as many as
touched were made whole.



XV.

THEN there come to Jesus the scribes and Pharisees from Jerusalem,
saying: (2)Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the
elders? For they wash not their hands when they eat bread. (3)And he
answering said to them: Why do ye also transgress the commandment of
God, for the sake of your tradition? (4)For God commanded,
saying[15:4]: Honor thy father and mother; and he that curses father
or mother, let him surely die. (5)But ye say: Whoever says to his
father or his mother, It is a gift, whatever thou mightest be profited
with from me, (6)shall not honor his father or his mother; and ye made
the word of God[15:6] of no effect, for the sake of your tradition.

(7)Hypocrites! Well did Isaiah prophesy of you, saying:

    (8)This people honor me with their lips,
    But their heart is far from me.
    (9)But in vain they worship me,
    Teaching as doctrines commandments of men.

(10)And calling to him the multitude, he said to them: Hear, and
understand: (11)Not that which enters into the mouth defiles the man;
but that which comes out of the mouth, this defiles the man.

(12)Then came to him his disciples, and said to him: Knowest thou that
the Pharisees, when they heard the saying, were offended? (13)And he
answering said: Every plant, which my heavenly Father planted not,
shall be rooted up. (14)Let them alone; they are blind leaders of the
blind; and if the blind lead the blind, both will fall into the ditch.

(15)And Peter answering said to him: Explain to us this parable.
(16)And he said: Are ye also even yet without understanding? (17)Do ye
not yet understand, that whatever enters into the mouth goes into the
belly, and is cast out into the drain? (18)But the things that proceed
out of the mouth come forth out of the heart; and they defile the man.
(19)For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false-witnessings, blasphemies. (20)These are
the things that defile the man; but to eat with unwashen hands defiles
not the man.

(21)And Jesus, going forth from thence, withdrew into the region of
Tyre and Sidon. (22)And behold, a woman of Canaan, coming out from
those borders, cried to him, saying: Have mercy on me, O Lord, Son of
David; my daughter is grievously possessed with a demon. (23)But he
answered her not a word. And his disciples came and besought him,
saying: Dismiss her; because she cries after us. (24)But he answering
said: I was not sent except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
(25)But she came and bowed down to him, saying: Lord, help me. (26)But
he answering said: It is not good to take the children's bread, and
cast it to the dogs. (27)And she said: Yea, Lord; for the dogs also
eat of the crumbs that fall from their masters' table. (28)Then Jesus
answering said to her: O woman, great is thy faith; be it done to thee
as thou wilt. And her daughter was healed from that hour.

(29)And departing from thence, Jesus came near to the sea of Galilee;
and going up into the mountain, he sat down there. (30)And great
multitudes came to him, having with them lame, blind dumb, maimed, and
many others, and laid them down at his feet, and he healed them;
(31)so that the multitudes wondered, when they saw the dumb speaking,
the maimed whole, the lame walking, and the blind seeing; and they
glorified the God of Israel.

(32)And Jesus, having called to him his disciples, said: I have
compassion on the multitude, because they continue with me now three
days, and have nothing to eat; and I will not dismiss them fasting,
lest they faint in the way. (33)And his disciples say to him: Whence
should we have so many loaves in the wilderness, as to fill so great a
multitude? (34)And Jesus says to them: How many loaves have ye? And
they said: Seven, and a few little fishes. (35)And he commanded the
multitudes to lie down on the ground. (36)And he took the seven loaves
and the fishes, and gave thanks, and broke, and gave to his disciples,
and the disciples to the multitude. (37)And they all ate, and were
filled. And they took up of the fragments that remained seven baskets
full. (38)And they who ate were four thousand men, besides women and
children. (39)And dismissing the multitudes, he entered into the ship,
and came into the borders of Magdala.



XVI.

AND the Pharisees and Sadducees came to him, and tempting desired him
to show them a sign from heaven. (2)And he answering said to them:
When it is evening, ye say: Fair weather! for the sky is red. (3)And
in the morning: A storm to-day! for the sky is red and lowering. Ye
know how to discern the face of the sky, but can ye not the signs of
the times?

(4)An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign; and no sign
shall be given to it, but the sign of Jonah. And he left them, and
departed.

(5)And coming to the other side, his disciples forgot to take bread.
(6)And Jesus said to them: Take heed, and beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees and Sadducees. (7)And they reasoned among themselves,
saying: Because we took no bread! (8)And Jesus knowing it said: Ye of
little faith, why reason ye among yourselves, because ye took no
bread? (9)Do ye not yet understand, nor remember the five loaves of
the five thousand, and how many baskets ye took up? (10)Nor the seven
loaves of the four thousand, and how many baskets ye took up? (11)How
is it that ye do not understand, that I spoke not to you of bread?
But, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees! (12)Then
they understood, that he did not bid them beware of the leaven of
bread, but of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.

(13)And having come into the region of Caesarea Philippi, Jesus asked
his disciples, saying: Who do men say that the Son of man is[16:13]?
(14)And they said: Some, John the Immerser; and others, Elijah; and
others, Jeremiah, or one of the prophets.

(15)He says to them: But who do ye say that I am? (16)And Simon Peter
answering said: Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.
(17)And Jesus answering said to him: Happy art thou, Simon
Bar-jonah[16:17]; for flesh and blood did not reveal it to thee, but
my Father who is in heaven. (18)And I also say to thee, that thou art
Peter[16:18a], and upon this rock I will build my church[16:18b]; and
the gates of the underworld shall not prevail against it. (19)And I
will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatever thou
shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatever thou shalt
loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.

(20)Then he charged his disciples, that they should tell no one that
he is the Christ.

(21)From that time Jesus began to show to his disciples, that he must
go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things from the elders and chief
priests and scribes, and be put to death, and rise on the third day.

(22)And Peter taking him aside began to rebuke him, saying: Be it far
from thee, Lord; this shall not be to thee. (23)But he turned and said
to Peter: Get thee behind me, Satan[16:23]; thou art an offense to me;
for thou thinkest not the things of God, but those of men.

(24)Then Jesus said to his disciples: If any one will come after me,
let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. (25)For
whoever will save his life shall lose it; and whoever may lose his
life for my sake, shall find it. (26)For what is a man profited, if he
shall gain the whole world, and forfeit his soul? Or what shall a man
give as an exchange[16:26] for his soul? (27)For the Son of man will
come in the glory of his Father, with his angels; and then he will
reward each one according to his works.

(28)Verily I say to you, there are some of those standing here, who
shall not taste death, till they see the Son of man coming in his
kingdom.



XVII.

AND after six days Jesus takes with him Peter, and James, and John his
brother, and brings them up into a high mountain apart. (2)And he was
transfigured before them; and his face shone as the sun, and his
garments became white as the light. (3)And behold, there appeared to
them Moses and Elijah, talking with him. (4)And Peter answering said
to Jesus: Lord, it is good for us to be here. If thou wilt, let us
make here three tents; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for
Elijah. (5)While he was yet speaking, behold, a bright cloud
overshadowed them. And behold, a voice out of the cloud, saying: This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him. (6)And the
disciples, hearing it, fell on their face, and were exceedingly
afraid. (7)And Jesus coming to them touched them, and said: Arise, and
be not afraid. (8)And lifting up their eyes, they saw no one save
Jesus only.

(9)And as they came down out of the mountain, Jesus charged them,
saying: Tell no one the vision, until the Son of man is risen from the
dead.

(10)And his disciples asked him, saying: Why then say the scribes that
Elijah must first come? (11)And he answering said: Elijah indeed
comes, and will restore all things. (12)But I say to you, that Elijah
is already come, and they knew him not, but did with him whatever they
would. So also is the Son of man about to suffer by them.

(13)Then the disciples understood that he spoke to them of John the
Immerser.

(14)And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a man,
kneeling down to him, and saying: (15)Lord, have mercy on my son; for
he is lunatic, and is sorely afflicted; for ofttimes he falls into the
fire, and oft into the water. (16)And I brought him to thy disciples,
and they could not cure him. (17)And Jesus answering said: O faithless
and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? How long shall
I bear with you? Bring him hither to me. (18)And Jesus rebuked him;
and the demon went out from him, and the child was cured from that
hour.

(19)Then the disciples, coming to Jesus apart, said: Why could not we
cast him out? (20)And he said to them: Because of your want of faith.
For verily I say to you, if ye have faith as a grain of mustard, ye
shall say to this mountain, remove hence to yonder place, and it shall
remove; and nothing shall be impossible to you. (21)But this kind goes
not forth, except by prayer and fasting.

(22)And while they abode in Galilee, Jesus said to them: The Son of
man is about to be delivered into the hands of men (23)and they will
put him to death, and he will rise on the third day. And they were
exceedingly sorrowful.

(24)And they having come to Capernaum, those who received the
half-shekel came to Peter, and said: Does not your teacher pay the
half-shekel[17:24]? (25)He says, Yes. And when he came into the house,
Jesus anticipated him, saying: What thinkest thou, Simon? Of whom do
the kings of the earth take customs, or tribute? Of their sons, or of
strangers? (26)He says to him: Of strangers. Jesus said to him: Then
are the sons free. (27)But that we may not offend them, go to the sea
and cast a hook, and take the fish that first comes up; and opening
its mouth thou wilt find a shekel; that take, and give to them for me
and thee.



XVIII.

AT that time came the disciples to Jesus, saying: Who then is greatest
in the kingdom of heaven?

(2)And Jesus, calling a little child to him, placed it in the midst of
them, (3)and said: Verily I say to you, if ye do not turn and become
as the little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
(4)Whoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, he is
the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. (5)And whoever shall receive
one such little child, in my name, receives me. (6)But whoever shall
cause one of these little ones that believe on me to offend, it were
better for him that an upper millstone were hanged about his neck, and
he were plunged in the depth of the sea.

(7)Woe to the world, for causes of offense! For it must needs be that
causes of offense come; but woe to that man, through whom the cause of
offense comes! (8)But if thy hand or thy foot causes thee to offend,
cut it off, and cast it from thee. It is better for thee to enter into
life lame or maimed, than having two hands or two feet to be cast into
the everlasting fire. (9)And if thine eye causes thee to offend, pluck
it out and cast it from thee. It is better for thee to enter into life
with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast into hell-fire.

(10)Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say
to you, that their angels in heaven always behold the face of my
Father who is in heaven. (11)For the Son of man came to save that
which was lost.

(12)What think ye? If a man has a hundred sheep, and one of them is
gone astray, does he not leave the ninety and nine upon the mountains,
and go and seek that which is gone astray? (13)And if it be that he
find it, verily I say to you, he rejoices over it more than over the
ninety and nine that went not astray. (14)So it is not the will of
your Father who is in heaven, that one of these little ones perish.

(15)But if thy brother shall sin against thee, go show him his fault
between thee and him alone, If he shall hear thee, thou hast gained
thy brother. (16)But if he hear not, take with thee one or two more,
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be
established. (17)And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it to the
church; and if he neglect to hear the church also, let him be to thee
as a heathen and a publican. (18)Verily I say to you: Whatever ye
shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatever ye shall
loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.

(19)Again I say to you, that if two of you shall agree on earth,
concerning any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them by
my Father who is in heaven. (20)For where two or three are gathered
together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.

(21)Then Peter came to him, and said: Lord, how often shall my brother
sin against me, and I forgive him? Until seven times? (22)Jesus says
to him: I say not to thee, until seven times, but until seventy times
seven.

(23)Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened to a certain king, who
desired to make a reckoning with his servants. (24)And when he had
begun to reckon, there was brought to him one, who owed ten thousand
talents[18:24]. (25)But as he was not able to pay, his lord commanded
him to be sold, and his wife, and children, and all that he had, and
payment to be made. (26)The servant therefore, falling, prostrated
himself before him, saying: Have patience with me, and I will pay thee
all. (27)And the lord of that servant, moved with compassion, released
him, and forgave him the debt. (28)But that servant went out, and
found one of his fellow-servants, who owed him a hundred
denaries[18:28]; and laying hold of him he took him by the throat,
saying: Pay me that thou owest. (29)Therefore his fellow-servant fell
down and besought him, saying: Have patience with me, and I will pay
thee. (30)And he would not; but went and cast him into prison, till he
should pay the debt. (31)And his fellow-servants, seeing what was
done, were very sorry, and came and disclosed to their lord all that
was done. (32)Then having called him, his lord says to him: Thou
wicked servant; I forgave thee all that debt, because thou besoughtest
me. (33)Shouldest not thou also have had pity on thy fellow-servant,
as I too had pity on thee? (34)And his lord was angry, and delivered
him to the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due to him.
(35)So also will my heavenly Father do to you, if ye from your hearts
forgive not every one his brother.



XIX.

AND it came to pass, when Jesus finished these sayings, that he
departed from Galilee, and came into the borders of Judaea beyond the
Jordan. (2)And great multitudes followed him, and he healed them
there.

(3)And the Pharisees came to him, tempting him and saying: Is it
lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?

(4)And he answering said to them: Have ye not read, that he who made
them[19:4] from the beginning made them male and female, (5)and said:
For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave
to his wife, and the two shall be one flesh. (6)So that they are no
longer two, but one flesh. What therefore God joined together, let not
man put asunder.

(7)They say to him: Why then did Moses command to give a writing of
divorcement, and to put her away? (8)He says to them: Moses, for your
hardness of heart, suffered you to put away your wives; but from the
beginning it was not so. (9)And I say to you, that whoever shall put
away his wife, except for fornication, and shall marry another,
commits adultery; and whoever marries her when put away, commits
adultery.

(10)His disciples say to him: If the case of the man with the woman is
so, it is not good to marry. (11)But he said to them: Not all can
receive this saying, but they to whom it is given. (12)For there are
eunuchs, who were so born from the mother's womb; and there are
eunuchs, who were made eunuchs by men; and there are eunuchs, who made
themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. He that is
able to receive it, let him receive it.

(13)Then were brought to him little children, that he might put his
hands on them and pray; and the disciples rebuked them. (14)But Jesus
said: Suffer the little children, and forbid them not to come to me;
for to such belongs the kingdom of heaven. (15)And he laid his hands
on them, and departed thence.

(16)And, behold, one came to him and said: Teacher, what good shall I
do, that I may have eternal life? (17)And, he said to him: Why dost
thou ask me concerning good? One is the Good. But if thou desirest to
enter into life, keep the commandments. (18)He says to him, Which?
Jesus said: Thou shalt not kill; Thou shalt not commit adultery; Thou
shalt not steal; Thou shalt not bear false witness; (19)Honor thy
father and thy mother; and, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.
(20)The young man says to him: All these I kept; what do I yet lack?
(21)Jesus said to him: If thou desirest to be perfect, go, sell what
thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in
heaven; and come, follow me. (22)But when the young man heard this
saying, he went away sorrowful; for he had great possessions.

(23)And Jesus said to his disciples: Verily I say to you, that a rich
man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. (24)And again I say
to you: It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle,
than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. (25)And the
disciples, hearing it, were exceedingly amazed, saying: Who then can
be saved? (26)But Jesus, looking on them, said to them: With men this
is impossible; but with God all things are possible. (27)Then Peter
answering said to him: Behold, we forsook all, and followed thee; what
then shall we have? (28)And Jesus said to them: Verily I say to you,
that ye who followed me, in the renovation, when the Son of man shall
sit on his throne of glory, shall also sit on twelve thrones, judging
the twelve tribes of Israel. (29)And every one who forsook houses, or
brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or
lands, for my name's sake, shall receive manifold more, and shall
inherit everlasting life. (30)But many first will be last, and last
first.



XX.

FOR the kingdom of heaven is like to a householder, who went out early
in the morning to hire laborers into his vineyard. (2)And having
agreed with the laborers for a denary[20:2] a day, he sent them into
his vineyard.

(3)And he went out about the third hour, and saw others standing idle
in the market-place. (4)And to them he said: Go ye also into the
vineyard, and whatever is right I will give you. And they went their
way.

(5)Again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour, and did likewise.

(6)And about the eleventh he went out, and found others standing, and
says to them: Why stand ye here all the day idle? (7)They say to him:
Because no one hired us. He says to them: Go ye also into the
vineyard.

(8)And when evening was come, the lord of the vineyard says to his
steward: Call the laborers, and pay them the hire, beginning from the
last, unto the first. (9)And they of the eleventh hour came, and
received every man a denary. (10)But when the first came, they
supposed that they should receive more; and they also received each
one a denary. (11)And on receiving it, they murmured against the
householder, (12)saying: These last labored one hour, and thou madest
them equal to us, who bore the burden of the day, and the burning
heat.

(13)But he answering said to one of them: Friend, I do thee no wrong.
Didst thou not agree with me for a denary? (14)Take what is thine, and
go. But I will give to this last, even as to thee. (15)Is it not
lawful for me to do what I will with my own? Is thine eye evil,
because I am good?

(16)So will the last be first, and the first last; for many are
called, but few are chosen.

(17)And Jesus, going up to Jerusalem, took the twelve disciples apart;
and in the way he said to them: (18)Behold, we are going up to
Jerusalem; and the Son of man will be delivered to the chief priests
and scribes, and they will condemn him to death, (19)and will deliver
him to the Gentiles to mock and scourge and crucify; and on the third
day he will rise again.

(20)Then came to him the mother of the sons of Zebedee, with her sons,
bowing down and asking a certain thing of him. (21)And he said to her:
What wilt thou? She says to him: Command that these my two sons shall
sit, one on thy right hand, and one on thy left, in thy kingdom.
(22)But Jesus answering said: Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to
drink of the cup that I shall drink of? They say to him: We are able.
(23)And he says to them: Ye shall drink indeed of my cup; but to sit
on my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give, but is for them
for whom it has been prepared by my Father. (24)And the ten, hearing
it, were much displeased with the two brothers. (25)But Jesus, having
called them to him, said: Ye know that the rulers of the Gentiles
exercise lordship over them, and they that are great exercise
authority over them. (26)Not so shall it be among you; (27)but whoever
would become great among you, let him be your minister; and whoever
would be first among you, let him be your servant; (28)even as the Son
of man came not to be ministered to, but to minister, and to give his
life a ransom for many.

(29)And as they were going forth from Jericho, a great multitude
followed him. (30)And behold, two blind men sitting by the way-side,
hearing that Jesus was passing by, cried, saying: Have mercy on us, O
Lord, Son of David. (31)And the multitude rebuked them, that they
should hold their peace. But they cried the more, saying: Have mercy
on us, O Lord, Son of David. (32)And Jesus stood still, and called
them, and said: What will ye that I shall do to you? (33)They say to
him: Lord, that our eyes may be opened. (34)And Jesus, moved with
compassion, touched their eyes; and immediately their eyes received
sight; and they followed him.



XXI.

AND when they drew near to Jerusalem, and came to Bethphage, at the
mount of the Olives, Jesus sent forth two disciples, (2)saying to
them: Go into the village over against you, and straightway ye will
find an ass tied, and a colt with her; loose and bring them to me.
(3)And if any one say aught to you, ye shall say: The Lord has need of
them; and straightway he will send them.

(4)Now all this has been done, that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken through the prophet, saying:

    (5)Say to the daughter of Zion,
    Behold, thy King comes to thee,
    Meek, and mounted upon an ass,
    And upon a colt, the foal of a beast of burden.

(6)And the disciples, having gone and done as Jesus commanded them,
(7)brought the ass and the colt, and put on them their garments, and
he sat thereon. (8)And most of the multitude spread their own garments
in the way; and others cut down branches from the trees, and strewed
in the way. (9)And the multitudes that went before, and that followed,
cried, saying: Hosanna[21:9] to the Son of David; Blessed is he who
comes in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest. (10)And as he
entered into Jerusalem, all the city was moved, saying: Who is this?
(11)And the multitudes said: This is Jesus the prophet, from Nazareth
of Galilee.

(12)And Jesus entered into the temple of God, and cast out all that
sold and bought in the temple, and overturned the tables of the
money-changers, and the seats of those who sold doves. (13)And he says
to them: It is written,

    My house shall be called a house of prayer;
    But ye make it a den of robbers.

(14)And the blind and the lame came to him in the temple, and he
healed them. (15)But the chief priests and the scribes, seeing the
wonders that he did, and the children crying in the temple, and
saying, Hosanna to the Son of David, were much displeased, (16)and
said to him: Dost thou hear what these say? And Jesus says to them:
Yea; did ye never read: From the mouth of babes and sucklings thou
preparedst praise?

(17)And leaving them, he went forth out of the city into Bethany, and
lodged there.

(18)And in the morning, as he was returning into the city, he
hungered. (19)And seeing a fig-tree by the way, he came to it, and
found nothing thereon but leaves only. And he says to it: Let there be
no fruit from thee henceforward, forever. And immediately the fig-tree
withered away. (20)And the disciples seeing it wondered, saying: How
did the fig-tree immediately wither away? (21)And Jesus answering said
to them: Verily I say to you, if ye have faith, and do not doubt, not
only shall ye do what is done to the fig-tree, but even if ye say to
this mountain, be thou taken up and cast into the sea, it shall be
done. (22)And all things whatever ye ask in prayer, believing, ye
shall receive.

(23)And when he had come into the temple, the chief priests and the
elders of the people came to him as he was teaching, and said: By what
authority doest thou these things; and who gave thee this authority?
(24)And Jesus answering said to them: I also will ask you one thing,
which if ye tell me, I too will tell you by what authority I do these
things. (25)John's immersion, whence was it? From heaven, or from men?
And they reasoned among themselves, saying: If we say, From heaven, he
will say to us: Why then did ye not believe him? (26)But if we say,
From men, we fear the multitude; for all hold John as a prophet.
(27)And they answered Jesus, saying: We do not know. And he said to
them: Neither do I say to you, by what authority I do these things.

(28)But what think ye? A man had two sons; and he came to the first,
and said: Son, go work to-day in the vineyard. (29)And he answering
said: I will not; but afterward he repented, and went. (30)And he came
to the other[21:30], and said likewise. And he answering said: I will,
sir; and went not. (31)Which of the two did the father's will? They
say to him: The first[21:31]. Jesus says to them: Verily I say to you,
that the publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before
you. (32)For John came to you in the way of righteousness, and ye did
not believe him; but the publicans and the harlots believed him; and
ye, when ye had seen it, repented not afterward, that ye might believe
him.

(33)Hear another parable. There was a householder, who planted a
vineyard, and put a hedge around it, and dug a winepress in it, and
built a tower, and let it out to husband-men, and went abroad. (34)And
when the season of fruits drew near, he sent his servants to the
husbandmen, to receive his fruits. (35)And the husbandmen taking his
servants, beat one, and killed another, and stoned another. (36)Again
he sent other servants, more than the first; and they did to them
likewise. (37)And afterward he sent to them his son, saying: They will
reverence my son. (38)But the husbandmen, seeing the son, said among
themselves: This is the heir; come, let us kill him, and have his
inheritance. (39)And taking him, they cast him out of the vineyard,
and killed him. (40)When therefore the lord of the vineyard comes,
what will he do to those husbandmen? (41)They say to him: He will
miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out the vineyard to
other husbandmen, who will deliver over to him the fruits in their
seasons. (42)Jesus says to them: Did ye never read in the Scriptures:

    The stone which the builders disallowed,
    The same is become the head of the corner;
    This is from the Lord,
    And is wonderful in our eyes.

(43)Therefore I say to you, that the kingdom of God shall be taken
from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.
(44)And he that falls upon this stone will be broken; but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.

(45)And the chief priests and Pharisees, hearing his parables, knew
that he spoke of them. (46)And they sought to lay hold of him, but
feared the multitudes, since they held him as a prophet.



XXII.

AND Jesus answering spoke to them again in parables, saying:

(2)The kingdom of heaven is like to a certain king, who made a
marriage for his son. (3)And he sent forth his servants to call those
who were bidden to the wedding; and they would not come. (4)Again he
sent forth other servants, saying: Tell those who are bidden, Behold,
I have prepared my dinner; my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all
things are ready; come to the marriage. (5)But they made light of it,
and went away, one to his farm, another to his merchandise. (6)And the
rest laid hold of his servants, and ill-treated and slew them. (7)And
the king, hearing it, was angry; and sending forth his armies, he
destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city. (8)Then he says
to his servants: The wedding is ready, but they who were bidden were
not worthy. (9)Go therefore into the thoroughfares, and as many as ye
find, bid to the marriage. (10)And those servants went out into the
highways, and gathered together all as many as they found, both bad
and good; and the wedding was furnished with guests.

(11)And the king, coming in to view the guests, saw there a man not
clothed with a wedding garment; (12)and he says to him: Friend, how
camest thou in hither, not having a wedding garment? And he was
speechless. (13)Then the king said to the attendants: Bind him hand
and foot, and cast him forth into the outer darkness. There will be
the weeping, and the gnashing of teeth! (14)For many are called, but
few are chosen.

(15)Then the Pharisees went and took counsel, how they might ensnare
him with a word[22:15]. (16)And they send out to him their disciples,
with the Herodians, saying: Teacher, we know that thou art true, and
teachest the way of God in truth; neither carest thou for any one, for
thou regardest not the person of men. (17)Tell us, therefore, what
thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not? (18)But
Jesus, knowing their wickedness, said: Why tempt ye me, hypocrites!
(19)Show me the tribute money. And they brought to him a
denary[22:19]. (20)And he says to them: Whose is this image, and the
inscription? (21)They say to him: Caesar's. Then says he to them;
Render therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God
the things that are God's. (22)And hearing it they wondered, and left
him and went away.

(23)On that day came to him Sadducees, who say that there is no
resurrection, and asked him, (24)saying: Teacher, Moses said, If any
one die having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and
raise up seed to his brother. (25)Now there were with us seven
brothers; and the first married and died, and having no seed left his
wife to his brother. (26)Likewise the second also, and the third, unto
the seventh. (27)And last of all the woman died also. (28)In the
resurrection therefore, of which of the seven shall she be wife? For
they all had her.

(29)Jesus answering said to them: Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures,
nor the power of God. (30)For in the resurrection they neither marry,
nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven.
(31)But concerning the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that
which was spoken to you by God, saying: (32)I am the God of Abraham,
and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the
dead, but of the living. (33)And the multitudes, hearing it, were
astonished at his teaching.

(34)And the Pharisees, hearing that he had put the Sadducees to
silence, collected together; (35)and one of them, a lawyer, asked,
tempting him and saying: (36)Teacher, what commandment is great in the
law? (37)Jesus said to him: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. (38)This is
the great and first commandment. (39)And the second is like to it:
Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thy self. (40)On these two
commandments hang all the law and the prophets.

(41)While the Pharisees were collected together, Jesus asked them,
(42)saying: What think ye concerning the Christ? Of whom is he the
son? They say to him: Of David. (43)He says to them: How then does
David, in the Spirit, call him Lord, saying:

    (44)The Lord said to my Lord,
    Sit on my right hand,
    Till I put thine enemies under thy feet.

(45)If then David calls him Lord, how is he his son? (46)And no one
was able to answer him a word; nor durst any one from that day
question him any more.



XXIII.

THEN Jesus spoke to the multitudes, and to his disciples, (2)saying:
The scribes and the Pharisees sat down in Moses' seat. (3)All,
therefore, whatever they bid you, do and observe; but do not according
to their works, for they say and do not. (4)For they bind heavy
burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders, but
will not move them with their finger. (5)But all their works they do
to be seen by men; they make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the
fringes; (6)and love the first place at feasts, and the first seats in
the synagogues, (7)and the greetings in the markets, and to be called
by men, Rabbi, Rabbi[23:7]. (8)But be not ye called Rabbi; for one is
your Teacher, and all ye are brethren. (9)And call not any your father
on the earth; for one is your Father, he who is in heaven. (10)Neither
be called leaders; for one is your leader, the Christ. (11)But the
greatest of you shall be your servant. (12)And whoever shall exalt
himself shall be humbled; and he that shall humble himself shall be
exalted.

(13)But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye shut
up the kingdom of heaven against men; for ye go not in, nor suffer
those who are entering to go in[23:13]:

(15)Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye traverse
sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him
twofold more a child of hell than yourselves.

(16)Woe to you, blind guides, who say: Whoever shall swear by the
temple, it is nothing; but whoever shall swear by the gold of the
temple, he is bound. (17)Fools and blind; for which is greater, the
gold, or the temple that sanctifies the gold? (18)And, Whoever shall
swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whoever shall swear by the gift
that is upon it, he is bound. (19)Fools and blind; for which is
greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifies the gift?

(20)He therefore who swears by the altar, swears by it, and by all
things thereon. (21)And he that swears by the temple, swears by it,
and by him who dwells therein. (22)And he that swears by heaven,
swears by the throne of God, and by him who sits thereon.

(23)Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye pay
tithe of the mint and the dill and the cumin, and omitted the
weightier things of the law, judgment, and mercy, and faith; these
ought ye to have done, and not leave those undone.

(24)Blind guides! that strain out the gnat, and swallow the camel.

(25)Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye cleanse
the outside of the cup and the platter, but within they are full of
rapacity and excess. (26)Blind Pharisee! Cleanse first the inside of
the cup and the platter, that its outside also may become clean.

(27)Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye are like
to whited sepulchres, which outwardly indeed appear beautiful, but
within are full of bones of the dead, and of all uncleanness. (28)So
also ye outwardly indeed appear righteous to men, but within ye are
full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

(29)Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! because ye build
the sepulchres of the prophets, and adorn the tombs of the righteous,
and say: (30)If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not
have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets. (31)So
that ye witness to yourselves, that ye are sons of those who killed
the prophets; (32)and fill ye up the measure of your fathers!

(33)Serpents! Brood of vipers! How can ye escape the judgment of hell?

(34)Therefore, behold, I send forth to you prophets, and wise men, and
scribes; and some of them ye will kill and crucify, and some of them
ye will scourge in your synagogues, and persecute from city to city;
(35)that on you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth,
from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah, son of
Barachiah, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar. (36)Verily I
say to you, all these things shall come upon this generation.

(37)Jerusalem! Jerusalem! that killest the prophets, and stonest those
sent to her; how often would I have gathered thy children together, as
a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!
(38)Behold, your house is left to you desolate. (39)For I say to you,
ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say: Blessed is he that
comes in the name of the Lord.



XXIV.

AND Jesus went out, and departed from the temple; and his disciples
came to him, to show him the buildings of the temple. (2)And he
answering said to them: See ye not all these things? Verily I say to
you, there shall not be left here one stone upon another, that shall
not be thrown down.

(3)And as he sat on the mount of the Olives, the disciples came to him
privately, saying: Tell us, when will these things be, and what is the
sign of thy coming and of the end of the world? (4)And Jesus answering
said to them: Take heed, lest any one lead you astray. (5)For many
will come in my name, saying: I am the Christ; and will lead astray
many. (6)And ye will hear of wars, and rumors of wars. Take heed, be
not troubled; for all must come to pass[24:6]; but not yet is the end!
(7)For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom;
and there will be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers
places. (8)But all these are the beginning of sorrows. (9)Then will
they deliver you up unto affliction, and will kill you; and ye will be
hated by all nations for my name's sake. (10)And then will many be
offended, and will deliver up one another, and will hate one another.
(11)And many false prophets will arise, and will lead many astray.
(12)And because iniquity abounds, the love of the many will become
cold. (13)But he that has endured to the end, the same shall be saved.
(14)And this good news of the kingdom shall be preached in all the
world, for a testimony to all nations; and then shall come the end.

(15)When therefore ye see the abomination of desolation, spoken of
through Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place (let him that
reads mark!) (16)then let those in Judaea flee to the mountains; he
that is upon the house, (17)let him not come down to take the things
out of his house; (18)and he that is in the field, let him not turn
back to take his garments. (19)But woe to those who are with child,
and to those who give suck in those days! (20)And pray that your
flight be not in winter, nor on a sabbath. (21)For then will be great
affliction, such as has not been from the beginning of the world until
now, no nor shall be. (22)And unless those days were shortened, no
flesh would be saved; but for the sake of the chosen, those days shall
be shortened. (23)Then if any one say to you: Lo, here is the Christ,
or, Here, believe it not. (24)For there will arise false Christs, and
false prophets, and will show great signs and wonders; so as, if
possible, to lead even the chosen astray. (25)Behold, I have told you
before.

(26)If therefore they say to you: Behold, he is in the desert, go not
forth; Behold, he is in the secret chambers, believe it not. (27)For
as the lightning comes forth from the east, and shines even unto the
west, so shall be the coming of the Son of man. (28)For wherever the
carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered together.

(29)And immediately, after the affliction of those days, the sun shall
be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars
shall fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken.
(30)And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven; and
then shall all the tribes of the earth[24:30] mourn, and shall see the
Son of man coming on the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory.

(31)And he will send forth his angels with a great sound of a trumpet,
and they shall gather together his chosen from the four winds, from
one end of heaven to the other.

(32)And learn the parable from the fig-tree: When its branch is
already become tender, and puts forth leaves, ye know that the summer
is near. (33)So also ye, when ye see all these things, know that it is
near, at the doors.

(34)Verily I say to you, this generation shall not pass, till all
these things are done. (35)Heaven and earth shall pass away; but my
words shall not pass away.

(36)But of that day and hour no one knows, not even the angels of
heaven, but my Father only. (37)But as the days of Noah, so shall be
also the coming of the Son of man. (38)For as they were in the days
before the flood, eating and drinking, marrying and giving in
marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark, (39)and knew
not until the flood came, and took all away; so shall be also the
coming of the Son of man. (40)Then shall there be two men in the
field, one is taken, and one is left; (41)two women grinding at the
mill, one is taken, and one is left.

(42)Watch therefore; for ye know not in what day[24:42] your Lord
comes. (43)But know this, that if the master of the house had known in
what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not
have suffered his house to be broken through. (44)Therefore be ye also
ready; for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son of man comes.

(45)Who then is the faithful and wise servant, whom his lord set over
his household, to give them their food in due season? (46)Happy that
servant, whom his lord when he comes shall find so doing! (47)Verily I
say to you, that he will set him over all his goods. (48)But if that
evil servant shall say in his heart: My lord delays his coming;
(49)and shall begin to beat his fellow-servants, and shall eat and
drink with the drunken; (50)the lord of that servant will come in a
day when he looks not for it, and in an hour when he is not aware;
(51)and will cut him asunder, and appoint his portion with the
hypocrites. There will be the weeping, and the gnashing of teeth!



XXV.

THEN shall the kingdom of heaven be likened to ten virgins, who took
their lamps, and went out to meet the bridegroom. (2)And five of them
were wise, and five foolish. (3)The foolish, taking their lamps, took
no oil with them; (4)but the wise took oil in their vessels with their
lamps. (5)While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept.
(6)And at midnight a cry was made: Behold, the bridegroom! Go out to
meet him. (7)Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps.
(8)And the foolish said to the wise: Give us of your oil, for our
lamps are going out. (9)But the wise answered, saying: Not so; there
will not be enough for us and you. Go rather to those who sell, and
buy for yourselves. (10)And while they went to buy, the bridegroom
came; and they who were ready went in with him to the marriage; and
the door was shut. (11)And afterward come also the rest of the
virgins, saying: Lord, Lord, open to us. (12)But he answering said:
Verily I say to you, I know you not.

(13)Watch, therefore; because ye know not the day, nor the hour!

(14)For as a man going abroad called his own servants, and delivered
to them his goods; (15)and to one gave five talents, to another two,
and to another one, to each according to his own ability; and
straightway went abroad. (16)And he that received the five talents
went and traded with them, and gained other five talents. (17)Likewise
also he that received the two gained other two. (18)But he that
received the one went away and digged in the earth, and hid his lord's
money. (19)After a long time the lord of those servants comes, and
reckons with them. (20)And he that received the five talents came and
brought other five talents, saying: Lord, thou deliveredst to me five
talents; behold, I gained other five talents beside them. (21)His lord
said to him: Well done, good and faithful servant; thou wast faithful
over a little, I will set thee over much. Enter thou into the joy of
thy lord. (22)And he also that received the two talents came and said:
Lord, thou deliveredst to me two talents; behold, I gained other two
talents beside them. (23)His lord said to him: Well done, good and
faithful servant; thou wast faithful over a little, I will set thee
over much. Enter thou into the joy of thy lord. (24)And he also that
received the one talent came and said: Lord, I knew thee that thou art
a hard man, reaping where thou didst not sow, and gathering where thou
strewedst not. (25)And fearing, I went and hid thy talent in the
earth. Lo, thou hast thine own. (26)And his lord answering said to
him: Wicked and slothful servant! Thou knewest that I reap where I did
not sow, and gather where I strewed not? (27)Thou oughtest therefore
to have put my money to the exchangers; and when I came, I should have
received my own with interest. (28)Take therefore the talent from him,
and give to him that has the ten talents. (29)For to every one that
has shall be given, and he shall have abundance; but from him that has
not, even what he has shall be taken away. (30)And cast forth the
unprofitable servant into the outer darkness. There will be the
weeping, and the gnashing of teeth!

(31)And when the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the
angels with him, then will he sit on his throne of glory. (32)And
before him shall be gathered all the nations; and he will divide them
one from another, as the shepherd divides the sheep from the goats.
(33)And he will set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the
left.

(34)Then will the King say to those on his right hand: Come, blessed
of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world. (35)For I was hungry, and ye gave me to eat; I was
thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger and ye took me in,
(36)naked and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in
prison, and ye came to me.

(37)Then will the righteous answer him, saying: Lord, when saw we thee
hungering and fed thee, or thirsting and gave thee drink? (38)And when
saw we thee a stranger and took thee in, or naked and clothed thee?
(39)And when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came to thee? (40)And
the King will answer and say to them: Verily I say to you, inasmuch as
ye did it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye did it to me.

(41)Then will he say also to those on the left hand: Depart from me,
accursed, into the everlasting fire; prepared for the Devil and his
angels. (42)For I was hungry, and ye did not give me to eat; I was
thirsty, and ye did not give me drink; (43)I was a stranger, and ye
did not take me in; naked, and ye did not clothe me; sick, and in
prison, and ye did not visit me.

(44)Then will they also answer, saying: Lord, when saw we thee
hungering, or thirsting, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in
prison, and did not minister to thee? (45)Then will he answer them,
saying: Verily I say to you, inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the
least of these, ye did it not to me.

(46)And these shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the
righteous into everlasting life.



XXVI.

AND it came to pass, when Jesus finished all these sayings, he said to
his disciples: (2)Ye know that after two days comes the passover, and
the Son of man is delivered up to be crucified.

(3)Then assembled together the chief priests, and the elders of the
people, in the court of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas,
(4)and consulted together that they might take Jesus by craft, and put
him to death. (5)But they said: Not at the feast, that there may not
be a tumult among the people.

(6)And Jesus being in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,
(7)there came to him a woman having an alabaster box of very precious
ointment, and poured it on his head as he reclined at table. (8)And
his disciples seeing it were displeased, saying: To what purpose is
this waste? (9)For this might have been sold for much, and given to
the poor. (10)And Jesus knowing it, said to them: Why trouble ye the
woman? For she wrought a good work upon me. (11)For the poor ye have
always with you; but me ye have not always. (12)For she, in pouring
this ointment on my body, did it to prepare me for burial. (13)Verily
I say to you, wherever this good news shall be preached in the whole
world, this also that she did shall be told, for a memorial of her.

(14)Then one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, went to the chief
priests, (15)and said: What will ye give me, and I will deliver him to
you? And they weighed out to him thirty pieces of silver. (16)And from
that time he sought opportunity to deliver him up.

(17)And on the first day of the feast of unleavened bread the
disciples came to Jesus, saying to him: Where wilt thou that we
prepare for thee to eat the passover? (18)And he said: Go into the
city to such a man, and say to him: The Teacher says, my time is at
hand; I will keep the passover at thy house with my disciples. (19)And
the disciples did as Jesus directed them, and made ready the passover.

(20)And when evening was come, he reclined at table with the twelve.
(21)And as they were eating, he said: Verily I say to you, that one of
you will betray me. (22)And they were exceedingly sorrowful, and began
to say to him, each one: Lord, is it I? (23)And he answering said: He
that dipped his hand with me in the dish, the same will betray me.
(24)The Son of man goes indeed, as it is written of him; but woe to
that man through whom the Son of man is betrayed! It were good for
him, if that man had not been born.

(25)And Judas, his betrayer, answering said: Rabbi, is it I? He says
to him: Thou saidst it.

(26)And as they were eating, Jesus took the loaf[26:26], and blessed,
and broke, and gave to the disciples, and said: Take, eat; this is my
body. (27)And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave to them,
saying: Drink all ye of it. (28)For this is my blood of the new
covenant[26:28], which is shed for many, for remission of sins.
(29)And I say to you, that I will not drink henceforth of this fruit
of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you, in the
kingdom of my Father.

(30)And having sung, they went out into the mount of the Olives.

(31)Then Jesus says to them: All ye will be offended because of me
this night. For it is written: I will smite the Shepherd, and the
sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad. (32)But after I have
risen, I will go before you into Galilee.

(33)Peter answering said to him: Though all shall be offended because
of thee, I will never be offended. (34)Jesus said to him: Verily I say
to thee, that this night, before a cock crows, thou wilt thrice deny
me. (35)Peter says to him: Even though I should die with thee, I will
not deny thee. Likewise also said all the disciples.

(36)Then Jesus comes with them to a place called Gethsemane, and says
to the disciples: Sit ye here, while I go yonder and pray. (37)And
taking with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, he began to be
sorrowful, and to be troubled. (38)Then says he to them: My soul is
exceedingly sorrowful, unto death. Tarry ye here, and watch with me.

(39)And going forward a little, he fell on his face, praying, and
saying: My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass away from me.
But yet, not as I will, but as thou wilt. (40)And he comes to the
disciples, and finds them sleeping; and he says to Peter: Were ye so
unable to watch with me one hour? (41)Watch and pray, that ye enter
not into temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is
weak.

(42)Again, a second time, he went away and prayed, saying: My Father,
if this can not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be
done. (43)And coming he again found them sleeping; for their eyes were
heavy.

(44)And leaving them, he went away again, and prayed the third time,
saying the same words. (45)Then he comes to his disciples, and says to
them: Do ye sleep the remaining time, and take your rest[26:45]!
Behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is betrayed into the
hands of sinners. (46)Rise, let us be going. Behold, he is at hand
that betrays me.

(47)And while he was yet speaking, behold, Judas, one of the twelve,
came, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the
chief priests and elders of the people. (48)And his betrayer gave them
a sign, saying: Whom I shall kiss, that is he; hold him fast. (49)And
forthwith he came to Jesus, and said: Hail, Rabbi; and kissed him.
(50)And Jesus said to him: Friend, wherefore art thou come? Then they
came, and laid hands on Jesus, and held him fast. (51)And, behold, one
of those who were with Jesus stretched out his hand and drew his
sword, and striking the servant of the high priest took off his ear.
(52)Then says Jesus to him: Put back thy sword into its place; for all
they who take the sword shall perish with the sword. (53)Thinkest thou
that I can not now pray to my Father, and he will send[26:53] me more
than twelve legions of angels? (54)How then shall the Scriptures be
fulfilled, that thus it must be?

(55)In that hour Jesus said to the multitudes: Are ye come out as
against a robber, with swords and staves, to take me? I sat daily with
you teaching in the temple, and ye did not lay hold of me. (56)But all
this has been done, that the scriptures of the prophets might be
fulfilled. Then the disciples all forsook him, and fled.

(57)And they who laid hold of Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the high
priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled. (58)And Peter
followed him afar off, unto the court of the high priest; and entering
in, he sat with the servants, to see the end.

(59)And the chief priests, and the elders, and all the council, sought
false witness against Jesus, that they might put him to death; (60)and
found none, though many false witnesses came. But at last came two,
(61)and said: This man said, I am able to destroy the temple of God,
and to build it in three days. (62)And the high priest arose, and said
to him: Answerest thou nothing? What do these witness against thee?
(63)But Jesus was silent. And the high priest answering said to him: I
adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou art the
Christ, the Son of God. (64)Jesus says to him: Thou saidst it. But I
say to you, hereafter ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right
hand of power, and coming on the clouds of heaven. (65)Then the high
priest rent his clothes, saying: He blasphemed! What further need have
we of witnesses? Behold, ye now heard his blasphemy. (66)What think
ye? They answering said: He is guilty of death. (67)Then they spit in
his face, and buffeted him; and others smote him, (68)saying: Prophesy
to us, O Christ, who is he that struck thee?

(69)And Peter was sitting without, in the court. And a damsel came to
him, saying: Thou also wast with Jesus the Galilaean. (70)But he
denied before all, saying: I know not what thou sayest. (71)And he
having gone out into the porch, another maid saw him, and said to
those who were there: This man also was with Jesus the Nazarene.
(72)And again he denied, with an oath: I do not know the man. (73)And
after a little while, they that stood by came and said to Peter:
Surely thou also art one of them; for thy speech betrays thee.
(74)Then he began to invoke curses, and to swear: I do not know the
man. And immediately a cock crowed. (75)And Peter remembered the word
of Jesus when he said: Before a cock crows, thou wilt thrice deny me.
And he went out, and wept bitterly.



XXVII.

AND when morning came, all the chief priests and the elders of the
people took counsel against Jesus, so as to put him to death. (2)And
having bound him, they led him away, and delivered him up to Pontius
Pilate the governor.

(3)Then Judas, who betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned,
repenting brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the chief
priests and the elders, (4)saying: I sinned in betraying innocent
blood. And they said: What is it to us? Look thou to it. (5)And
casting down the pieces of silver in the temple, he departed; and he
went away and hanged himself. (6)And the chief priests took the silver
pieces, and said: It is not lawful to put them into the treasury,
since it is the price of blood. (7)And they took counsel, and bought
with them the potter's field, to bury strangers in. (8)Wherefore that
field was called the field of blood, unto this day.

(9)Then was fulfilled that which was spoken through Jeremiah the
prophet, saying:

    And they took the thirty pieces of silver,
    The price of him that was priced,
    Whom they of the sons of Israel did price,
    (10)And gave them for the potter's field,
          as the Lord appointed to me.

(11)And Jesus stood before the governor. And the governor questioned
him, saying: Art thou the king of the Jews? And Jesus said to him:
Thou sayest it. (12)And when he was accused by the chief priests and
the elders, he made no answer. (13)Then says Pilate to him: Hearest
thou not what things they witness against thee? (14)And he made him no
answer, not even to one word; so that the governor greatly wondered.

(15)Now at the feast the governor was wont to release to the multitude
one prisoner, whom they would. (16)And they had then a noted prisoner,
called Barabbas. (17)When therefore they were assembled, Pilate said
to them: Whom will ye that I release to you? Barabbas, or Jesus who is
called Christ? (18)For he knew that through envy they delivered him
up.

(19)And as he sat on the judgment-seat, his wife sent to him, saying:
Have nothing to do with that just man; for I suffered much this day,
in a dream, because of him.

(20)And the chief priests and the elders persuaded the multitudes,
that they should ask for Barabbas, and should destroy Jesus. (21)And
the governor answering said to them: Which of the two will ye that I
release to you? And they said: Barabbas. (22)Pilate says to them: What
then shall I do with Jesus, who is called Christ? They all say to him:
Let him be crucified. (23)And the governor said: What evil then did
he? But they cried the more, saying: Let him be crucified.

(24)And Pilate, seeing that it avails nothing, but rather that a
tumult is made, took water and washed his hands before the multitude,
saying: I am innocent of the blood of this just man. Look ye to it.
(25)And all the people answering said: His blood be on us, and on our
children. (26)Then he released to them Barabbas; but Jesus, having
scourged him, he delivered up to be crucified.

(27)Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the Pretorium,
and gathered to him the whole band. (28)And they stripped him, and put
on him a scarlet robe. (29)And having platted a crown of thorns, they
put it on his head, and a reed in his right hand; and bowing the knee
before him, they mocked him, saying: Hail, King of the Jews! (30)And
they spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the head.
(31)And when they had mocked him, they took off the robe from him, and
put on him his own garments, and led him away to crucify him. (32)And
as they came out they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name; him they
compelled to bear his cross.

(33)And having come to a place called Golgotha (which is called, Place
of a skull), (34)they gave him vinegar to drink[27:34], mingled with
gall; and tasting it, he would not drink. (35)And having crucified
him, they divided his garments among them, casting lots. (36)And
sitting down, they watched him there. (37)And they set up over his
head his accusation, written: THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

(38)Two robbers are then crucified with him, one on the right hand,
and one on the left. (39)And those passing by reviled him, wagging
their heads, (40)and saying: Thou that destroyest the temple, and
buildest it in three days, save thyself. If thou art the Son of God,
come down from the cross. (41)Likewise also the chief priests mocking,
with the scribes and elders, said: (42)Others he saved, himself he can
not save. If he is King of Israel, let him now come down from the
cross, and we will believe on him. (43)He trusts in God; let him now
deliver him, if he desires him; for he said I am the Son of God.
(44)And also the robbers, who were crucified with him, reproached him
with the same thing.

(45)And from the sixth hour, there was darkness over all the land,
unto the ninth hour. (46)And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a
loud voice, saying: Eli, Eli, lema sabachthani? That is: My God, my
God, why didst thou forsake me? (47)Some of those standing there,
hearing it, said: This man calls for Elijah[27:47]. (48)And
straightway one of them ran and took a sponge, and having filled it
with vinegar and put it on a reed, gave him to drink. (49)But the rest
said: Let alone; let us see whether Elijah comes to save him.

(50)And Jesus, again crying with a loud voice, yielded up his spirit.
(51)And behold, the vail of the temple was rent in twain from the top
to the bottom; and the earth quaked, and the rocks were rent; (52)and
the tombs were opened, and many bodies of the saints who have fallen
asleep arose, (53)and coming out of the tombs, after his resurrection,
went into the holy city, and appeared to many.

(54)And the centurion, and they that with him were watching Jesus, on
seeing the earthquake, and the things that were done, were exceedingly
afraid, saying: Truly this was the Son of God.

(55)And many women were there, beholding afar off, they who followed
Jesus from Galilee, ministering to him; (56)among whom was Mary the
Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of
the sons of Zebedee.

(57)And evening having come, there came a rich man from Arimathaea,
named Joseph, who also himself was a disciple of Jesus. (58)This man
went to Pilate, and asked for the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded
that the body should be given up. (59)And taking the body, Joseph
wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, (60)and laid it in his own new
tomb, which he hewed out in the rock. And having rolled a great stone
to the door of the tomb, he departed. (61)And Mary the Magdalene was
there, and the other Mary, sitting over against the sepulchre.

(62)And on the morrow, which is after the preparation, the chief
priests and the Pharisees came together to Pilate, (63)saying: Sir, we
remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive: After three
days I will rise. (64)Command, therefore, that the sepulchre be made
secure until the third day lest his disciples come and steal him away,
and say to the people: He is risen from the dead; and the last error
will be worse than the first. (65)Pilate said to them: Ye have a
watch; go, make secure, as ye know how. (66)And they went, and made
the sepulchre secure, sealing the stone, in connection with the watch.



XXVIII.

AND late in the sabbath, as it was dawning into the first day of the
week, came Mary the Magdalene and the other Mary to view the
sepulchre. (2)And behold, there was a great earthquake. For an angel
of the Lord, descending out of heaven, came and rolled away the stone,
and sat upon it. (3)His countenance was like lightning, and his
raiment white as snow; (4)and for fear of him the keepers shook, and
became as dead men. (5)And the angel answering said to the women: Fear
not ye; for I know that ye are seeking Jesus, who was crucified. (6)He
is not here; for he is risen, as he said. Come hither, see the place
where the Lord lay. (7)And go quickly, and tell his disciples that he
is risen from the dead. And behold, he goes before you into Galilee;
there ye shall see him. Behold, I told you.

(8)And going out quickly from the sepulchre, with fear and great joy,
they ran to bring his disciples word. (9)And behold, Jesus met them,
saying: All hail! And they, coming to him, laid hold of his feet, and
worshiped him. (10)Then Jesus says to them: Be not afraid; go, bear
word to my brethren, to go away into Galilee, and there they shall see
me.

(11)And as they were going, behold, some of the watch came into the
city, and reported to the chief priests all the things that were done.
(12)And having assembled with the elders, and taken counsel, they gave
much money to the soldiers, (13)saying: Say, that his disciples came
by night, and stole him away while we slept. (14)And if this shall be
heard by the governor[28:14], we will persuade him, and make you
secure. (15)And they, taking the money, did as they were taught. And
this saying was reported abroad among the Jews, until this day.

(16)And the eleven disciples went away into Galilee, into the mountain
where Jesus had appointed them. (17)And seeing him, they worshiped
him; but some doubted.

(18)And Jesus came and spoke to them, saying: All power was given to
me in heaven and on earth. (19)Go therefore, and disciple all the
nations, immersing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Spirit; (20)teaching them to observe all things, whatever
I commanded you. And, behold, I am with you alway, unto the end of the
world.



